= Note on Vim Plugins =

I was a proponent of minimal vim setup.
My `vimrc` file is barely over 100 lines, and remains the same,
because I tend to install it on production environments.
The core vim features are rather powerful,
although it did not save me from installing tons of plugins.
This page will keep them documented.

== Color schemes ==
{{{
  Plugin 'flazz/vim-colorschemes'
  Plugin 'challenger-deep-theme/vim'
  Plugin 'drewtempelmeyer/palenight.vim'
  Plugin 'rakr/vim-one'
}}}

I prefer `challenger-deep-theme` nowadays.

== Airline ==
{{{
  Plugin 'vim-airline/vim-airline'
  Plugin 'vim-airline/vim-airline-themes'
}}}

Airline has a decent status-line and integration with Syntastic out of the box.
My tweaks only disable Unicode symbols and add current working directory to the status-line.

{{{
  let g:airline_theme='badwolf'
  let g:airline_section_c='%<%f%m (%{getcwd()})'
  let g:airline_symbols_ascii = 1
}}}

== Syntastic ==
{{{
  Plugin 'scrooloose/syntastic'
}}}

Syntastic is convenient for bash and python scripts given `pylint` and `shellcheck` are installed.
Even although `pylint` is rather useless because majority of PEP is opinionated garbage.
Anyway, their page states that defaults are not particularly well suitable for new users.
I copied their recommended settings, since it does not clash with other plugins:

{{{
let g:syntastic_python_checkers = ['pylint']
let g:syntastic_sh_checkers = ['shellcheck']
let g:syntastic_auto_loc_list = 1
let g:syntastic_check_on_open = 1
let g:syntastic_check_on_wq = 0
let g:syntastic_always_populate_loc_list = 1
}}}

== FZF Integration ==
{{{
  Plugin 'junegunn/fzf'
  Plugin 'junegunn/fzf.vim'
}}}

`fzf` is a CLI fuzzy finder, very useful one.
Vim integration enables search in buffer list, files, and buffer contents.

{{{
  nnoremap <Leader>F :Files .<CR>
  nnoremap <Leader>B :Buffers<CR>
  nnoremap <Leader>L :Lines<CR>
}}}


== Gitgutter ==
{{{
  Plugin 'airblade/vim-gitgutter'
}}}

== Language Extensions ==
{{{
  Plugin 'vimwiki/vimwiki'
  Plugin 'plasticboy/vim-markdown'
  Plugin 'sheerun/vim-polyglot'
}}}

== Lisp Editing ==
{{{
  Plugin 'guns/vim-sexp'
  Plugin 'tpope/vim-sexp-mappings-for-regular-people'
}}}
