= Java: Optional =

    Tony Hoare introduced Null references in ALGOL W back in 1965 "simply
    because it was so easy to implement", says Mr. Hoare. He talks about that
    decision considering it "my billion-dollar mistake".

Null references were a terrible idea.
{{{java
  x = f();
  x.method();
}}}

If `f()` returns null reference, flow will fail. It may indicate a error,
absence of value, an implementation mistake  — literally anything. And
programming language has no means of communicating whether null references are
theoretically possible.

The code above should be fixed to avoid unexpected error:
{{{java
  x = f();
  if (x != null) {
    x.method();
  }
}}}

But it's so easy to forget to do it every time a value has to be accessed.

Two approaches exist to mitigate the annoyance of null references: IDE
inspections and type system. The former insist on labeling `f()` with
annotation indicating that nulls are possible; the latter relies on leveraging
the type system, forcing the programmer to do the necessary check operations.

For instance, we can turn null references into special kind of object,
that reminds to carefully handle the return value: `Optional<>`:
{{{java
  Optional<T> x = f();
  if (x.isPresent()) {
    y = x.get();
  }
}}}

Obviously, it makes matter even worse (i.e. more code).

Annotations are subjectively superior way of dealing with nulls. Just slap
`@Nullable` on top of the method and IDE will report whether a null ref check
is not taken care of. Working with `Optional` is too bothersome and results in
even more meaningless code.

Although, lets introduce few intermediate operations to the mix:
{{{java
  x = f();
  if (x != null) {
    y = g(x);
    if (y != null) {
      y.method();
    }
  }
}}}

I hope it's clear where this is going. Gluing multiple operations that
spontaneously return nulls results in a staircase of nested ifs. Basically
unreadable. This is the moment when `Optional` adoption is favorable:
{{{java
  Optional.ofNullable(f())
    .map(g)
    .ifPresent(y -> {
      y.method()
    });
}}}

Two last snippets are practically equivalent. `Optional` does scale well with
adding more intermediate operations to the mix: just add one more `.map`.
Adding additional if is clearly more painful.

The general rule of thumb: use optional only to make a chain of multiple
operations that possibly return nulls. It makes no sense to use `Optional`
otherwise.

Escaping back from `Optional` to the square one is easy:
{{{java
  x = optional.orElse(null);
  if (x != null) {
    x.method();
  } else {
    anotherAction();
  }
}}}

The subjectively superior way of doing it if there's no else-branch is to call
`.ifPresent()`:
{{{java
  optional.ifPresent(x -> x.method());
}}}

The idea is the same: less code is better.
